Centralized Web-Based Real-Time Blood Inventory System with Donation and Bloodletting Records
Background of the study
Blood is a vital component of the human body and plays a crucial role in saving lives during surgeries, trauma cases, and the treatment of various medical conditions such as anemia, cancer, and hemophilia. Aditi Patil, et al. (2025). Managing blood inventory is a balance between not having enough and wasting it. The challenge is to keep enough stock to ensure a 100% supply of blood while keeping time expiry losses at a minimum. Sebastian H W Stanger et al. (2012). Bloodletting is one of the oldest known medical treatments. Long before doctors wrote things down, healers made small cuts or used sharp stones to draw blood. William Aird (2025).
There is still an existing gap, blood inventory management is very complex. First, since ordering policies are geared toward tactical-operational decisions, it is important to deal with the inherent uncertainty of future demand. Second, the perishability of blood products makes it impossible to accumulate inventory for long periods of time, forcing regular replenishment of blood units. Clay et al. (2018). Current blood bank management faces difficulties because of inadequate logistic systems, and it depends on manual work and lacks unified donor-recipient communication channels. Sahil Ateeque Khan, et al. (2025). Traditional systems often face challenges like donor management, blood compatibility checking, and stock wastage. Jay Bagawade, et al. (2024).
This study aims to develop a Centralized Web-Based Real-Time Blood Inventory System with Donation and Bloodletting Records, a user-friendlyand efficient web-based platform that not only streamlines the process of blood inventory management but also transparency of blood availability, generate report on blood demand, usage, expiration risk and community engagement in blood donations. Through this system it would be easier for blood donors to locate the nearest blood donation in their area. In addition, the system will implement role-based access control and data control mechanisms to ensure that the data of donors is secure and confidential.
Objectives of the Study
The objective of this study is to develop a Centralized Web-Based Real-Time Blood Inventory System with Donation and Bloodletting Records.
Specifically, the study aims to:
1. Develop a system that can:
Provide real-time blood inventory updates.
Provide reports and show summarized data on blood demand, use, and safety risks.
Notify users blood availability and schedule donation activities.
Allow users who are not registered to view available blood types and donation schedules in public.
 Display the locations of blood donation activities and blood banks through a map-based interface.
2. Determine the quality of the developed application based on the IT experts' testing using the ISO/EC 25010 Software Quality Model Criteria.
3. Determine the quality in the use of the developed system in terms of effectiveness, efficiency, satisfaction, freedom from risk, and context coverage.
Product Quality through IT experts' evaluation in terms of functional suitability, performance efficiency, compatibility, usability, reliability, security, maintainability, and;
Quality in Use through end-users' assessment in terms of effectiveness, efficiency, satisfaction, freedom from risk, and context coverage.
Scope and Limitations
This study focuses on the development of a Centralized Web-based Real-Time Blood Inventory System, with Donation and Bloodletting Records. The system is intended to assist with managing blood inventory more conveniently, as it provides one platform to store, organize, and manage all blood-related information.
The scope of this study is confined to the creation and deployment of the web-based system, along with its fundamental features, within the designated facility. This system is designed to operate independently, without provisions for integration with external hospital information systems, national blood bank databases, or third-party healthcare platforms. The study also excludes advanced features like predictive analytics and automated blood demand forecasting since it focuses on essential system functions and efficient data management.
The system is only accessible by the authorized personnel, including administrators, blood bank personnel, and medical technologists responsible for managing and monitoring the facility’s blood supply. Authorized personnelwill have the capability to generate reports detailing blood donations and their applications. They will additionally maintain monitoring on blood donation and bloodletting activities, monitor the status of changes in inventory, and store their records in a secure central database. In order to keep data safe, only authorized users have access to it. Real-time access to data, updates, and system functionality requires a stable internet connection.
Significance of the Study
 The Centralized Web-Based Real-Time Blood Inventory System with Donation and Bloodletting Records optimizes the management and monitoring of blood supply through an organized and centralized web platform, and is beneficial to the following:Healthcare Facilities and Blood Banks.  The system will help the Healthcare Facilities and Blood Banks to track blood inventory, which can reduce wastage due to expiration. 
Medical Personnel. This system will help the Medical Personnel to easily access up-to-date availability of blood supply, which is crucial during emergencies. 
Blood Donors. The system intends to make it convenient for blood donors to locate blood donation or bloodletting activities that are currently scheduled around that location.System Administrators. The system allows administrators to manage user accounts, keep an eye on system activities, and maintain data confidentiality through role-based access control to make sure the platform works effectively.
Researchers. This system will expand the knowledge of researchers, and it will serve as a foundation for future research. 
Future Researchers. This study may function as a reference for future researchers aiming to develop or broaden the system through the integration of supplementary features, system improvements, or more extensive applications within healthcare information systems.
Definition of Terms. 
Blood Inventory.  According to Smith J. (2023), Blood Inventory is critical for ensuring timely availability of blood and its components, such as blood cell, platelets, plasma, and white blood cells, to support surgeries, trauma care, cancer treatments, and chronic illnesses while minimizing wastage. 
In this study, it refers to the information which is stored to maintain blood withdrawal operations ongoing, including donor and transaction information. 
Bloodletting Records. According to Mikyung Kim, et al. (2024), Bloodletting is a non-pharmacological treatment commonly used for acute stroke in traditional East Asian medicine. 
In this study, it refers to the stored information maintaining blood withdrawal operations, including donor and transaction information. 
Centralized. According to Mona Abughazalah, et al. (2024), Centralized refers to data and information that are stored together at one location, known as a single data center. This offers many services, such as integration, effectiveness, simplicity, and rapid information access.  
In this study, it refers to the use of a single database for managing and storing every blood inventory and transaction information. 
Inventory Fluctuations. According to Gudavalli, et al. (2022), Inventory fluctuations refer to the changes in inventories due to changes in demand, supply, and usage over time. 
In this study, it refers to the fluctuations in the inventory of blood quantities resulting from donation, bloodletting, and usage over time.
Mapping.  According to Wikle, Thomas A. (2024). Mapping involves the representation of geospatial information in various formats, both paper and digital, utilizing technologies such as remote sensing and Geographic Information Systems (GIS). 
In this study, it refers to the feature which shows a map of blood donation activities and blood banks that are nearby. 
Monitoring. According to Fazila Malik (2025), Monitoring refers to collection and analysis of data pulled from IT systems. DevOps monitoring uses dashboards often developed by internal teams to measure the health of applications by tracking particular metrics.
 In this study, it refers to maintaining monitoring and tracking blood inventory and related activities in the system continuously. 
Notification. According to Alex Libby (2025), Notification is the common theme running through each component, it is about telling the user, customers, or visitors of something they should be aware of in any site using one of these components. 
In this study, it refers to the section of the system that allows users to determine when blood is available, when donations are scheduled, and when blood units will eventually expire. 
Real-Time. According to Vangie Beal (2021),Real-time refers to occurring immediately. It is the actual time when something takes place. This term is typically used as an adjective to describe a level of computer responsiveness that is immediate in a human sense of time. 
In this study, it indicates that the system can process and update data in real time as transactions occur.
Role-Based Access Control. According to Darwish Al Neyadi, et al. (2023), Role-Based Access Control is a mechanism that controls access to resources within the organization based on the roles of individual users. It prevents unauthorized access to assure security and integrity. 
In this study, it refers to the system characteristic that restricts access to data and functionalities according to user roles.
Web-Based. Based on the conducted research of Haydar Metin (2025), Web-Based is a modeling tool that provides unprecedented opportunities for the realization of modern, powerful and usable diagram editors running in the cloud.  
In this study, the term web-based application refers to a web-based application developed to manage, monitor, and ensure the up-to-date status of blood supplies and related information within the facility.
Figure 1.0
Conceptual Framework
Figure 1.0 shows that the study follows the Input-Process-Output-Outcome (IPOO) model. The input includes donor information, blood donation and bloodletting records, blood inventory data, and user credentials, that are processed through data which are processed through data recording and storage, real-time monitoring, report generation, notification system, role-based access control, and mapping of blood donation activities. The output is the Centralized Web-Based Real-Time Blood Inventory System with Donation and Bloodletting Records. while the outcome includes improved blood inventory management, reduced blood wastage, accurate and reliable data, faster access to information, and increased accessibility of donation activities.
Chapter 2
REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE AND PRIOR ARTS
This chapter discusses the concepts and studies that went into developing a Centralized Web-Based Real-Time Blood Inventory System with Donations and Bloodletting Records. This provides valuable information about the matter of the study.
On the Review Related Literature
Cloud-Based Blood Banking with Real-Time Donor Tracking Using Machine Learning
According to Aman Raj, et al. (2025),  Blood banks play a pivotal  role in  ensuring safe and timely blood transfusions, making them essential in healthcare systems. The gap was stated in the paper, it was identified that traditional blood bank management often relies on manual processes, leading to inefficiencies, delays, and logistical challenges, especially during emergencies. To address that issue they proposed a cloud-based blood bank management system that was designed to enhance the efficiency, accessibility, and security in terms of blood donation and distribution. The system leverages cloud computing, mobile technology, and machine learning to establish a centralized and intelligent platform that connects donors, recipients, hospitals, and blood banks. The paper mentioned that their system has an AI-powered feature that has a recommendation engine that matches donor recipients based on their blood type compatibility, location, and urgency, that can reduce response times, minimize blood wastage, and improve emergency preparedness. 
Additionally the system reduces human works, and human errors that are associated with manual record keeping, it can enhance data security with the help of cloud-based storage. Overall, the study demonstrates how adopting advanced technologies can transform traditional blood bank operations into more responsive and data-driven. 
Development of a System for the Central Blood Banks
According to Lamis S. Mahmoud (2024).The rising demand for quick and efficient access to information regarding blood banks is due to the increased demand for blood within healthcare systems, Traditional blood bank management systems have been dependent on manual processes to address community based needs. As community needs grow to the point of having very large populations or numbers of blood donors, traditional methods no longer provide the necessary capability to keep up with large-scale demands from community-based blood donors and can create dangerous delays to healthcare services, especially during emergencies. To address these challenges, they created an integrated blood bank management system that provides an up-to-date, comprehensive database to help users retrieve accurate information by using various criteria, such as city/state (geographic location) and blood type, in order to improve the management of blood inventory, patient and donor records, and blood donation campaigns. This integrated system will also foster increased participation among communities for blood donations.
In addition, this system has been designed to identify all available blood components (blood/bags) for healthcare providers and help them identify eligible/donor candidates. Donor eligibility is determined by collecting key health data from donors and is calculated based upon the donor's age and overall health, which increases the safety and reliability of donors. The system leverages modern technological developments including MySQL, HTML5, CSS, and Javascript to produce a responsive system. Overall, using this strategy/approach will provide operational efficiency, quick access to critical data, and a better user experience, while supporting long-term supply sustainability of blood.
IoT Based E-Blood Bank System for Real Time Hospital Monitoring and Inventory Management
According to Sahil Ateeque Khan et al. (2025), the challenges posed by inadequate supplies of blood, as well as barriers inherent to the delivery of those supplies in healthcare institutions, are significant factors contributing to approximately 12,000 deaths per day, across India. In India, it is estimated that approximately 14.6 million units of blood shall be required on an annual basis to meet the needs of patients and hospitals; however, there is still a substantial shortage in excess of 1 million units. The factors contributing to this problem are primarily due to the inefficiencies associated with blood logistics, reliance upon manual operations and such, as well as the lack of one centralized means of communication between blood donors and blood recipients. Therefore, it has become increasingly difficult for traditional/blood bank management systems to respond in a timely manner in order to prevent these deadly instances and enhance overall patient care.
The project's developers have created a Web-Based E-Blood Bank Management System that is intended to address some of these issues by improving all aspects associated with the blood donation & distribution process. By utilizing modern technology including Node.js, Express.js, React & MongoDB, etc., this new medication will provide people with easy access and reliability for submitting requests for blood; therefore, once they request blood through this new system, they will receive an automatic notification as to whether they are eligible donors or not. In addition, users of the new system will be able to search through location-based search capabilities to determine the location of nearby blood banks or donation centers. Because of these improved capabilities, the new system will facilitate real-time communication among donors and recipients to help minimize delays in the overall blood donation process, as well as help encourage more people to donate blood, thereby ultimately helping to reduce the number of people dying due to the above-mentioned causes.
 BLOOD BANK AND DONATION MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
Aditi Patil et al., (2025) states that there is a growing need for an efficient, timely, and secure global blood supply in all parts of healthcare because of a worldwide demand for blood products. Due to inefficient procedures used by blood banks to manage blood products and services, and to engage donors effectively, many common problems can arise: the manual operation of traditional blood donation and blood management processes causes delays in obtaining blood; there is a lack of real-time data on blood supply levels; problems in coordinating blood supplies; and there are countless attempts to fulfil an urgent or emergency demand for blood.
To address these issues, the proposed Blood Bank and Donation Management System (BBDMS) is a web-based application that digitizes the management of blood, donors, and inventory. The BBDMS allows potential donors to determine their eligibility and make appointments to donate blood. In addition, the hospital or blood recipient can request blood products based on blood type, and check the status of their request via hospital coordination. The BBDMS will provide blood banks with real-time data, automated alerts for blood inventory levels, and an efficient blood allocation workflow to help manage their blood supply more efficiently and effectively. In addition, administrators will be able to manage all of the blood they have available for donation, as well as their donor records and hospital requests. By minimizing human errors and providing improved means of communicating between hospitals, donors, and blood banks, the BBDMS will enhance the speed and quality of blood availability in times of emergency; thus, improving the overall efficacy of health care.
BLOOD BANK MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
According to Dr. Anand Singh Rajawat, et al (2025). Blood banks play an essential role in the health care continuum by providing vital access to safe and compatible blood that can save lives through delivering the right blood, at the right time. With an increase in the demand for blood, there has also been a statistically significant increase in the complexity of donor management and all that is involved with collecting, testing, storing, and distributing blood. This has illustrated some of the limitations of traditional manual processes. Limitations encountered with respect to traditional manual processes include lengthy retrieval times for information, challenges in tracking blood units, challenges in maintaining eligibility records of donors and the risk of unknown human error compromising safety and efficiency of Operations.
To combat these issues, researchers have proposed a comprehensive Blood Bank Management System that will allow for automating and streamlining core operational processes and related data.  This system integrates donor registration; donation tracking; donor screening results; monitoring of blood inventory; and processing of hospital requests into one centralized digital platform that includes a well-structured database and an easy-to-use interface to provide real time access to inventory of blood products, accurate management of donor eligibility, and complete traceability of blood products.  In doing so, this system will increase transparency, reduce administrative burdens, decrease errors, and improve response time to emergencies thereby improving the overall reliability and effectiveness of blood banks operations.
Integrating GIS in reorganizing blood supply network in a robust-stochastic approach by combating disruption damages
According to Niloofar Gilani Larimi, et al. (2022), the COVID-19 pandemic has shown that many nations encountered severe difficulties when trying to ensure an adequate supply of blood. Consequently, there is an immediate requirement to create a more stable and dependable blood supply chain. Disruptions caused by the pandemic delayed blood orders and deliveries and created significant financial and social hardship for healthcare organizations. These disruptions also revealed how short existing systems are, demonstrating the need for and value of creating plans and methods to obtain blood as well as distribute it efficiently and continuously, even during major disruptions like natural disasters or pandemics.
To address the challenges faced by blood supply chains during the pandemic, the researchers developed a comprehensive multi-phase optimization approach to create an optimal blood supply network model. The researchers used real-life data that they gathered, and also used a Geographic Information System (GIS) based approach for determining alternative locations for blood donation centers to increase access and reduce distance from donors. Additionally, the researchers created a mathematical model that considered several critical factors such as the perishability of blood, multiple blood supply sources, backup donation centers, blood donation center capacity limitations and other factors contributing to blood supply uncertainty. The researchers also used a two-stage stochastic optimization model to increase readiness for emergencies and to maximize hospital coverage by blood supply. The researchers were able to conclude that the inclusion of backup facilities and the consideration of resource constraints can help reduce risk and make better decisions which will contribute to an overall increase in blood supply chain resiliency and efficiency.
Blood Donation Management Application
According to Sanjivani Adsul, et al. (2025). Blood is a critical component of numerous types of medical situations. Blood is important in many situations such as trauma or injury, in major surgeries, and also as treatment for a number of medical conditions including many types of cancers, hemophilia, sickle cell disease, and anemia. When there is an emergency, it is critical to have blood available at the right time. If blood is not available at the time a patient needs it, it can cause the patient to die as a result of the lack of blood. Approximately 600,000 units of blood are wasted every year because they are not stored and/or managed properly. These issues further support the need to develop better systems for greater access to blood, lower blood waste, and improved effectiveness of blood donation and distribution systems.
To address these concerns, the authors of this study created a blood donation application named "Jeevanam". This application allows users to connect with potential blood donors within close proximity through a GPS locator in order to help expedite the process of obtaining much needed blood.
The app also contains a list of potential donors and displays the locations of nearby blood banks. The app sends notifications to voluntary blood donors when a local blood donation drive will occur and tracks their history of blood donations. The app also determines whether the donor is eligible using a quick virtual health checkup in the form of a questionnaire. The app utilizes Java and Firebase to communicate between users and blood donors, decrease blood wastage, increase awareness of donating blood, and increase overall efficiency.
Development and Implementation of a Web-Based Blood Bank Management System for Efficient Blood Donation and Distribution
According to Gollapelly Manika, et al (2023) , blood donation plays an integral role in the preservation of life around the world; however, the method of administering blood and maintaining inventory is accomplished through the use of old-fashioned systems that are inefficient and slow and very prone to errors. Because the methods by which we manage the data about the donors, how we track blood inventory, and how we distribute blood to patients are currently mostly manual processes, many of the vital services that need to be provided to patients can be negatively impacted by the inefficiency of these processes. Additionally, these limitations could impede blood banks’ overall efficiency in providing blood during crucial moments such as for emergencies where immediate access might be needed.
As such, they are in great need of a more efficient and dependable system in order to improve operations at blood banks.
In order to address this issue, the researchers designed, developed, and implemented a web-based application that will facilitate the management of blood donation processes, including but not limited to managing blood inventory, registering blood donors, and distributing blood donated by blood donors to medical facilities. By digitizing the entire process of collecting blood donations from donors, from the point of registering the donor through the point of collection & ultimately providing collected blood to a medical facility or organization, the researchers incorporated additional means of improving data management by reducing time and errors related to data entry when working with the application. Blood banks can also better communicate with donors and easily share information or coordinate between the two groups through the use of the web application. This means blood banks will also be able to automate many processes within the donation process, which will increase the efficiency and reliability of blood bank operations, resulting in improved overall health outcomes for patients.
Smart Platform for Data Blood Bank Management: Forecasting Demand in Blood Supply Chain Using Machine Learning
According to Walid Ben Elmir et al. (2023). Blood transfusion and delivery remains a significant challenge within Blood Supply Chain Management (BSCM) globally, particularly during times of increased demand and limited blood inventories. The reduction of uncertainty regarding blood demand, minimizing blood waste, and preventing blood shortages have been identified as top priorities. Traditional BSCM methods frequently fail to accurately predict blood demand and to effectively manage blood resources, resulting in imbalances that adversely affect patient care and the overall effectiveness of healthcare provider operations. 
To address these issues, this study proposed a smart platform-oriented approach utilizing machine learning and time series forecasting within the context of developing an "AI-based Decision Support System (DSS)," which consists of three primary components: 1) blood demand forecasting, 2) donor classification, and 3) appointment scheduling.
The blood demand forecasting component produces predicted values for future corpus use; the donor classification component produces estimates of potential donors and provides a means to limit the volume of blood collected to the amount deemed necessary; the appointment scheduling component utilises foresee blood demand to schedule blood donation appointments and minimize missed appointment rates. In total, this smart approach is expected to improve both the quality and quantity of the blood supply by reducing the incidence of unqualified blood donations and wastage from blood inventory. 
Blockchain-IoT Based Blood Supply Chain Management System
Bikramjit Choudhury, et al. (2022) state that, while India cannot yet fully meet its needs for donated blood units, much of what is available goes to waste because there is not an efficient way of tracking the supply chain from donors through blood banks to final recipients. Additionally, there is a chance that transfusions with reference to HIV and several other diseases can occur due to unregulated blood donations as well as the lack of infrastructure required for the safe provision of the blood supply chain in India.
Consequently, the researchers developed the Blockchain-based Blood Supply Chain Management System to address these issues with appropriate stakeholders, including donors, inspection centres, hospitals, blood banks and blood donation registries. In their implementation, they utilised blockchain technology for the immutability and transparency of data, as well as increase the security and auditability of reporting activities. Their Blockchain-based Blood Supply Chain Management System utilises authentication through both attribute-based access controls and multi-party endorsement, including IoT automated data insertion as well as blood unit source tracking. Hyperledger Fabric, a permission-based private blockchain technology available from The Linux Foundation, was used in the implementation of the Blockchain-based Blood Supply Chain Management System, where only authorised participants can access the blockchain and its value. The implementation uses smart contracts containing the rules and processes that govern the operation of the system. Through performance evaluation of the Blockchain-based Blood Supply Chain Management System, it has been determined that it can provide reliable throughput (gross volume throughput of 208.666 units/hour) and low-latency (29.39ms) operations, thus providing the ability to improve both the management of the blood supply of India and increase the efficiency of the overall healthcare system.
On the Prior Arts
IoT Based E-Blood Bank System for Real Time Hospital Monitoring and Inventory Management
Khan et al. (2025) stated that an IoT-based e-Blood Bank System was designed to improve blood bank operations more efficiently by fixing problems with manual processes and communication gaps between stakeholders. The system serves a central hub that interacts with donors, patients, and healthcare facilities. This allows users to submit their requests, receive automated notifications, and maintain a monitoring of blood inventory in real time. This feature allows users to search for nearby blood banks and donation centers based on their location, which makes it more convenient to schedule appointments and deliver blood to individuals on time. The system indicates an effective way to monitor information in real time, and features like interactive mapping and making it accessible for users to navigate this could make it significantly more efficient.
Figure 2.0
System Flowchart of IoT-Based E-Blood Bank System
Figure 2.0 shows the system flowchart, which illustrates how users interact with the IoT-based e-Blood Bank System. Users can sign up or log in to the system from the home page, which is where the flow starts. Then it continues to role administration, which controls who has access to the system and what activities it can perform, and finally to the logout process. This flow shows how users are able to navigate within and access the system.
The Use of Web Technology and IoT to Contribute to the Management of Blood Banks In Developing Countries
Ismail et al. (2022) stated that a web- and IoT-based system was developed to improve blood bank management more efficiently, especially in developing countries where manual processes and system issues are common. The system provides donors a centralized location to maintain track of their information, monitors updates on blood supplies, and allows it more convenient to match blood types efficiently in an instance of an emergency. The platform provides data convenient to navigate and offers real-time monitoring of blood supply by integrating web technologies and the Internet of Things (IoT). Which makes blood bank operations more effective and organized. The interface illustrates an excellent way to interact with modern technologies in healthcare, and implementing features such as easier access for users and interactive system interfaces could improve it even better.
Figure 2.1
Overview of the IoT-Based E-Blood Bank System
In Figure 2.1, the overall architecture of the IoT-based e-Blood Bank System is shown. The system illustrates how donors, healthcare personnel, and the centralized database are connected through a web-based dashboard. It presents the process starting from donor registration and eligibility checking to blood collection and storage, along with real-time monitoring using IoT sensors. The system also incorporates cloud services and mobile notifications to improve data management and communication among users.
Digitalize Blood Bank Management System
Hossain (2024) stated that a web-based application was designed to improve the efficiency of blood donation and distribution processes. This application is recognized as a digitalized blood bank management system. The system provides users a centralized location to manage information about donors, recipients, and blood inventory. This allows it convenient for them to register, log in, and process blood requests. It allows for keeping track of donation records and blood types, which makes certain that the blood supply is being monitored properly. The system makes it accessible to users and healthcare facilities to work collaboratively by making data more accessible to locate and organize. It demonstrates an effective way to digitize blood bank operations, and features such as real-time monitoring, mapping integration, and advanced notification systems could improve it more efficiently.
Figure 2.2
Entity-Relationship Diagram of the Digitalized Blood Bank Management System
In Figure 2.2, the entity-relationship diagram of the digitalized blood bank management system is shown. This demonstrates how users, admins, blood banks and donation records are associated or related to one another. The system's data organization and handling, user sign up and appointment management, blood inventory information storage is presented in the diagram above. This enables the system to operate more efficiently and arrange information in a clearer manner.
Location-Based Mobile Application for Blood Donor Search
Iparraguirre-Villanueva et al. (2022) stated that a mobile application based on GPS for mobile devices was designed in order to facilitate the search for blood donors. This system also makes it easy for users to find nearby donors and blood donation organizations. And it is because it facilitates communication between donors and recipients, reducing the time to find blood of a compatible kind. From the convenience of the app, users can donate, and get real-time location-based information services. The platform provides a demonstration of how to effectively implement location-based technology in healthcare, and future enhancements such as more advanced mapping capabilities and event-driven notifications could make it even better.
Figure 2.3
Location-Based Mobile Application for Blood Donor Search
In Figure 2.3, displays the system's location-based interface, which allows users access a map app to locate blood donors and blood donation centers near them. The app leverages geolocation technology to pinpoint and display locations, making it simple for users to find the closest blood donors and hospitals. This feature makes things convenient to navigate and improves speed up collaboration in blood donation operations.
Design and Implementation of a Scale, Real-Time, Web-Based Blood Bank Management System: Architecture, Features and Performance Analysis
Eweoya et al. (2025) stated that the creation of a scalable, web-based blood bank management system designed to enhance operational efficiency via real-time monitoring and automation. This system streamlines data management by enabling user registration of donors, automated processing of blood requests, and more effective inventory tracking. Furthermore, the system includes notification features, such as alerts for low blood supplies and reminders for donations, which help ensure quick responses to blood needs. These features improve data accuracy and accessibility, thus streamlining coordination and reducing delays in blood bank operations. The system showcases a practical application of real-time monitoring and notification functionalities; additionally, the incorporation of mapping features and enhanced public accessibility could augment its utility.
Figure 2.4
System Flowchart of Web-Based Blood Bank Management System
In Figure 2.4, shows the system flowchart, which illustrates the complete process of the web-based blood bank management system. The process begins with user login or registration, followed by access to role-based dashboards for donors and hospitals. It presents the steps involved, including donor registration, blood request submission, inventory checking, and eligibility verification. The system also manages notifications, creates reports, and updates inventory records. This functionality aids in the effective coordination and management of blood bank operations.
References
Intro
Stanger, S. H. W., Yates, N., Wilding, R., & Cotton, S. (2012). Blood Inventory Management: Hospital Best Practice. Transfusion Medicine Reviews, 26(2), 153–163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tmrv.2011.09.001
Aird, W. (2025, December 29). Letting Blood: The Rise, Reign, and Fall of Medicine’s Oldest Therapy • The Blood Project. The Blood Project. https://www.thebloodproject.com/river-of-life-letting-blood-the-rise-reign-and-fall-of-medicines-oldest-therapy/
Bagawade, J., Hiremath, M., Akshay Lekurwale, & Prof S P Jagtap. (2024). A COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF REAL-TIME BLOOD INVENTORY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS. ResearchGate. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.29433.68966
Clay, N. M., Abbasi, B., Eberhard, A., & Hearne, J. (2016). On the volatility of blood inventories. International Transactions in Operational Research, 25(1), 215–242. https://doi.org/10.1111/itor.12326
‌
‌
‌
definition
Kim, M., & Han, C. (2024). Bloodletting for acute stroke recovery: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Healthcare, 12(19). https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Bloodletting-for-Acute-Stroke-Recovery%3A-A-Review-Kim-Han/57ad3f8773d539c01f0710f9892fc0f605a7ad48
Abughazalah, M., Alsaggaf, W., Saifuddin, S., & Sarhan, S. (2024). Centralized vs. Decentralized Cloud Computing in Healthcare. Applied Sciences, 14(17), 7765–7765. https://doi.org/10.3390/app14177765
Kim, M., & Han, C. (2024). Bloodletting for Acute Stroke Recovery: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Healthcare, 12(20), 2060–2060. https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare12202060
‌Darwish Al Neyadi, Deepak Puthal, Dutta, J., & Damiani, E. (2023). Role-Based Access Control in Private Blockchain for IoT Integrated Smart Contract. IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology, 227–245. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45882-8_16
‌Metin, H., & Bork, D. (2025). A reference architecture for the development of GLSP-based web modeling tools. Software and Systems Modeling. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10270-024-01257-y
‌Malik, F. (2025, March 27). Monitoring. Strongdm.com; StrongDM, Inc. https://www.strongdm.com/what-is/monitoring?fbclid=IwY2xjawQ5Y9RleHRuA2FlbQIxMABicmlkETF4aUdDS1c1QkV4TWxpSFhsc3J0YwZhcHBfaWQQMjIyMDM5MTc4ODIwMDg5MgABHj8f3hYutbhNBOsYvBF3-SV-YFuz-xMtd8uqP8M_USoa1l8hvjKIUF6na2Oi_aem_8aZAmOi3HTDuGTlmRlP5Og
Optimizing Blood Inventory Management: Best Practices For Hospitals. (n.d.). https://www.rjpn.org/ijcspub/papers/IJCSP25A1059.pdf
Optimizing Blood Inventory Management: Best Practices For Hospitals. (n.d.). https://www.rjpn.org/ijcspub/papers/IJCSP25A1059.pdf
‌Sunil Gudavalli, & Ayyagari, A. (2025). Inventory Forecasting Models Using Big Data Technologies. SSRN Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.5068357
Maps and Mapping | Research Starters | EBSCO Research. (2024). EBSCO. https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/geography-and-cartography/maps-and-mapping
Libby, A. (2025, February 27). Creating Notification Components. https://doi.org/10.1007/979-8-8688-1180-7_5
RRL references
IJRASET. (n.d.). Web-Based Blood Bank Management System for Efficient Blood Donation and Distribution. Www.ijraset.com. Retrieved February 29, 2024, from https://www.ijraset.com/research-paper/web-based-blood-bank-management-system-for-efficient-blood-donation-and-distribution
Optimizing Blood Inventory Management: Best Practices For Hospitals. (n.d.). https://rjpn.org/ijcspub/papers/IJCSP25A1059.pdf
‌Rajawat, A. S., Gupta, H. K., Rashid, A., Hussain, S., & Pagar, N. (2025, November). Blood bank management system. International Journal of Progressive Research in Engineering Management and Science, 5(11), 972–980.https://www.ijprems.com/ijprems-paper/blood-bank-management-system
Patil, A. (2022). Blood Bank Management System. International Journal for Research in Applied Science and Engineering Technology, 10(8), 902–904. https://doi.org/10.22214/ijraset.2022.46295
‌Divya Jyothi, M., Kumar Reddy P, M., & Kumar, P. (2026). Issue 2 www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162). JETIR2602057 Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research, 13. https://www.jetir.org/papers/JETIR2602057.pdf
‌Raj, A., Singh, A., Ashraf, M. M., Khan Samim, Danthuluri Sudha, & Junaid Mundichipparakkal. (2025). Cloud-Based Blood Banking with Real-Time Donor Tracking Using Machine Learning. Atlantis Highlights in Intelligent Systems/Atlantis Highlights in Intelligent Systems, 461–471. https://doi.org/10.2991/978-94-6463-866-0_39
‌(PDF) Development and Implementation of a Web-Based Blood Bank Management System for Efficient Blood Donation and Distribution. (2026). Academia.edu. https://www.academia.edu/105178898/Development_and_Implementation_of_a_Web_Based_Blood_Bank_Management_System_for_Efficient_Blood_Donation_and_Distribution
‌Gilani Larimi, N., Azhdari, A., Ghousi, R., & Du, B. (2022). Integrating GIS in reorganizing blood supply network in a robust-stochastic approach by combating disruption damages. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 101250. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seps.2022.101250
‌Chowdhary, K., Yu, D. X., Pramana, G., Mesoros, M., Fairman, A., Dicianno, B. E., & Parmanto, B. (2020). User-Centered Design to Enhance mHealth System for Individuals with Dexterity Impairments: An Accessibility and Usability Study (Preprint). JMIR Human Factors. https://doi.org/10.2196/23794
‌Mahnaz Samadbeik, Engstrom, T., Lobo, E. H., Kostner, K., Austin, J. A., Pole, J. D., & Sullivan, C. (2024). Healthcare dashboard technologies and data visualization for lipid management: A scoping review. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making, 24(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12911-024-02730-w
Grosman-Rimon, L., Li, D. H. Y., Collins, B. E., & Wegier, P. (2023). Can we improve healthcare with centralized management systems, supported by information technology, predictive analytics, and real-time data?: A review. Medicine, 102(45), e35769. https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000035769
Prior arts references
Khan, S. A., Shams, S., Alam, P., Yakubu, H., & Warsi, A. H. (2025). IoT Based E-Blood Bank System for Real Time Hospital Monitoring and Inventory Management. International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer Science and Technology, 13(3), 120–126. https://doi.org/10.55524/ijircst.2025.13.3.19
Ismail, R. D., Hussein, H. A., Salih, M. M., Ahmed, M. A., Hameed, Q. A., & Omar, M. B. (2022). The Use of Web Technology and IoT to Contribute to the Management of Blood Banks in Developing Countries. Applied System Innovation, 5(5), 90. https://doi.org/10.3390/asi5050090
‌Hossain, F. (2024). Digitalized Blood Bank Designing and implementing a web-based application. Software Engineering. https://www.theseus.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/863010/Hossain_Md%20Forkan.pdf?sequence=3&isAllowed=y
‌Iparraguirre-Villanueva, O., Sierra-Linan, F., & Cabanillas-Carbonell, M. (2022). Location-based Mobile Application for Blood Donor Search. International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 13(4). https://doi.org/10.14569/ijacsa.2022.0130418
‌Design and Implementation of a Scalable, Real-Time, Web-Based Blood Bank Management System: Architecture, Features, and Performance Analysis | FUOYE Journal of Engineering and Technology. (2025). Fuoye.edu.ng. https://www.journal.engineering.fuoye.edu.ng/index.php/engineer/article/view/1447
‌
‌
